Propose threading section (#200)
decentralized-identity/didcomm-messaging: docs/guide-files/threading.md

## Threading

DIDComm's threading mechanism enables referencing individual messages, the sets of messages that constitute a logically independent interaction (a "run" or "instance" of a protocol), or even the hierarchies of messages that model nested and recursive workflows. This helps with troubleshooting, debugging, error reporting, resend logic, interactions across more than two parties, and patterns of communication that are more flexible or asynchronous than simple request+response.

Some context about the intent and best practices for these features may be helpful:

> * For cybersecurity reasons, the `id` properties of related messages SHOULD NOT bear any resemblance to one another; `id` values SHOULD be opaque and SHOULD NOT be used to "tunnel" other semantics. This lack of a detectable relationship should be characteristic of `id` values for messages that stand in sequence to one another, as well as the `id` properties of `forward` messages seen by mediators vis-a-vis the `id` of the innermost plaintext messages they carry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For cybersecurity reasons, the `id` properties of related messages are intended not to bear any resemblance to one another; `id` values are expected to be opaque and will likely cause additional issues if they include overloaded semantics that are unique to a particular implementation. This lack of a detectable relationship should be characteristic of `id` values for messages that stand in sequence to one another, as well as the `id` properties of `forward` messages seen by mediators vis-a-vis the `id` of the innermost plaintext messages they carry.
```

I think it makes sense to remove the normative statements here and keep this as implementation guidance. Here's a suggestion on how we can clean it up to make that happen.

Reviewer: Looks like this and 2 other comments in this file are the only ones left to resolve.

### Threads

> Like threads in email, a **thread** in DIDComm intends to model a discrete interaction. For protocols that have a beginning and end (e.g., exchanging credentials, playing a game of chess, making a payment), a DIDComm thread maps exactly onto the sequence of messages that embody one such interaction; when a new interaction like this starts, the parties MUST impute a new thread to the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like threads in email, a **thread** in DIDComm intends to model a discrete interaction. For protocols that have a beginning and end (e.g., exchanging credentials, playing a game of chess, making a payment), a DIDComm thread maps exactly onto the sequence of messages that embody one such interaction; when a new interaction like this starts, the parties are expected to impute a new thread to the context.
```

I was considering suggesting we move this section to the spec files because that normative statement seemed useful. However, I wasn't certain how we'd test that so opted to change this to non normative text. If you know of a way that we could make this testable, I'm open to moving this particular text back to the spec and keeping this normative.

Reviewer: Looks like this and 2 other comments in this file are the only ones left to resolve.

> However, some DIDComm protocols are not obviously discrete. An example of this might be a human-friendly chat; humans don't necessarily perceive crisp interaction boundaries around any given subset of the messages they trade back and forth. In such cases, a thread might map to a topic, a unit of time, or something else. Applications MAY structure the thread construct in whatever way makes sense to the implementers, but MUST describe the threading assumptions of the protocol in the protocol's documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some DIDComm protocols are not obviously discrete. An example of this might be a human-friendly chat; humans don't necessarily perceive crisp interaction boundaries around any given subset of the messages they trade back and forth. In such cases, a thread might map to a topic, a unit of time, or something else. Applications can structure the thread construct in whatever way makes sense to the implementers, but MUST describe the threading assumptions of the protocol in the protocol's documentation.
```

This last MUST in here is an interesting one. I think we may actually want to move this back to the spec even though it's not machine testable. This is very similar to what we're doing with defining how to author a DID Method with DID Core.

Reviewer: Looks like this and 2 other comments in this file are the only ones left to resolve.

### Parent Threads

> Parent threads and child threads do NOT necessarily represent *threads of execution* or concurrency; they only represent logically separable *sequences of messages*. A parent thread MAY trigger multiple child threads, and MAY cascade to multiple levels of nested message threads (for example, issuing a credential triggers payment, which in turn triggers feature discovery). Parent threads and child threads do not have a simple containment or ownership relationship. By definition, a parent is only a trigger &mdash; not necessarily a controller or stakeholder. A parent thread MAY end before or after any of its child threads. Parent and child threads MAY interact or share data, but are not required to do so. (How they do so is out of scope in this spec, but see [Coprotocols](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/blob/master/concepts/0478-coprotocols/README.md) for one way to approach this.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parent threads and child threads do not necessarily represent *threads of execution* or concurrency; they only represent logically separable *sequences of messages*. A parent thread can trigger multiple child threads which could cascade to multiple levels of nested message threads (for example, issuing a credential triggers payment, which in turn triggers feature discovery). Parent threads and child threads do not have a simple containment or ownership relationship. By definition, a parent is only a trigger &mdash; not necessarily a controller or stakeholder. A parent thread has no guarantees about it's lifecycle and could end before or after any of its child threads. Parent and child threads also can interact or share data, but are not required to do so. (How they do so is out of scope in this spec, but see [Coprotocols](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/blob/master/concepts/0478-coprotocols/README.md) for one way to approach this.)
```

Reviewer: This is very beneficial detail that is going to be helpful for implementers. Thanks for making sure this gets written down.

Author: Updated per suggestion.

#### Parent and Child Examples

> Suppose a DIDComm-based protocol (and therefore, a thread of messages) is underway in which an issuer wants to give a credential to a holder. At a particular stage in this interaction, perhaps the issuer asks the prospective holder of the credential to pay for what they're about to receive. For composability, encapsulation, reusability, and versioning reasons, negotiating and consummating payment is best modeled as a separable interaction from credential exchange &mdash; so a new sequence of messages (dedicated to payment) begins. In this example, the credential issuance interaction (message thread 1) is the parent of the payment interaction (message thread 2). The first message in thread 2 MUST contain a `pthid` header that references the `thid` from thread 1.

Reviewer: This paragraph looks like it fits better back in the spec text. That normative statement seems important and I think it should remain rather than allowing it to stay in the non-normative guide.

Author: Moved back to spec, per suggestion.

> >NOTE: When a child protocol is a simple two-party interaction, mentioning the `pthid` in the first message of the child interaction is enough to establish context. However, in protocols involving more than two parties, the first message of the child protocol may not be seen by everyone, so simply mentioning `pthid` once may not provide enough context. Therefore, the rule is that each party in a child protocol MUST learn the identity of the parent thread via the first child protocol message they see. The simplest way to ensure this is to mention the `pthid` with every message in the child protocol. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>NOTE: When a child protocol is a simple two-party interaction, mentioning the `pthid` in the first message of the child interaction is enough to establish context. However, in protocols involving more than two parties, the first message of the child protocol may not be seen by everyone, so simply mentioning `pthid` once may not provide enough context. Therefore, the rule is that each party in a child protocol are expected to learn the identity of the parent thread via the first child protocol message they see. The simplest way to ensure this is to mention the `pthid` with every message in the child protocol. 
```

Author: Moved back into spec with previous paragraph, and kept the MUST. I don't think the behavior described with "MUST" can be optional. But let's discuss further if needed.

> Creating a connection is another classic interaction that lends itself to a parent-child paradigm. Alice and Bob rarely connect just to connect; usually they connect so they can conduct some type of business. In such situations, the connection protocol is a parent thread, and whatever business they then conduct becomes a child.

Reviewer: This part of the section and lower seems like it would make sense to leave it in this implementation guide. It's good detail that helps protocol designers/implementers that should be documented, but the lack of a normative statement lends it to suggest it's probably best not to put back in the spec. For this reason I think it should remain here.

Reporting and resolving errors and warnings is also a good use case for parent and child threads. It is true that problems can be communicated in specialized messages of an individual protocol; some protocols may make this choice. However, problems are often the gateway to deeper troubleshooting or even support tickets, which are complex workflows in their own right. Also, robust mechanisms for logging, analyzing, and reacting to problems may be reusable in many workflows. For this reason, it is recommended to model problem reporting as a child protocol, with an arbitrarily complex thread of messages as child to the parent workflow that triggered them. See [Reporting and Handling Problems](#reporting-and-handling-problems) for more info.

Sometimes the parent of a thread is not known, or is so independent of its child as to be irrelevant. If Alice and Bob connected three years ago, each new interaction that they begin doesn't need to declare a `pthid` that references the original interaction that connected them. Declare a parent relationship for a thread when it is likely to be useful.

### DIDComm Message URIs

> The `id`, `thid`, and `pthid` properties of any DIDComm message may be combined to form a URI that uniquely identifies the message (e.g., in debuggers, in log files, in archives). When this is further combined with [JSPath](https://github.com/dfilatov/jspath#quick-example), individual elements of messages may also be hyperlinked. See [Linkable Message Paths](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/blob/master/concepts/0217-linkable-message-paths/README.md). Such a scheme is out of scope for this spec, and support for it is NOT required of implementers. However, this spec reserves the `didcomm://` URI prefix for future work with semantics like these.

Reviewer: I think most of this paragraph should remain here, but that semantic reservation probably needs to go back into the spec for greater awareness about the topic even if we may leave it as non-normative. Take a look at [this note](https://w3c.github.io/did-core/#did-url-syntax) in did-core about how the `;` charter was "reserved" without being normative.

Author: What would be the "semantic reservation" part that you'd move back?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's generally considered this functionality will be combined with [JSPath](https://github.com/dfilatov/jspath#quick-example), [JS Pointer](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6901), or individual elements of messages may also be hyperlinked. For a good idea of the concepts that we'd like to enable with this capability, see [Linkable Message Paths](https://github.com/hyperledger/aries-rfcs/blob/master/concepts/0217-linkable-message-paths/README.md).
```

Author: Okay, I took this out of the guide and put it back into the spec, with verbiage that tracks what you suggested here. You are attributed as author of the commit.
